
But let's... let's just get started. So, check this out.
First, I'm gonna start by making it yellow.
I like the color yellow,
but see how the room is in fact now yellow.
Enjoy the yellow.
Maybe take a deep breath.
Let's change that color. 
Do you see how your room suddenly changed?
Red light makes you more calm, it makes you tired. It relaxes you.
Where, with a certain blue color, you stay awake.
So, every color has a sort of different way of influencing us.
This is what art is about.
You are a co-author with me,
the main protagonist. What you see is quite up to you.
[narrator]  Olafur Eliasson:
artist, architect, and design phenom. 
[man]  In Olafur's work, you first have a "wow,"
and then you have an "aha."
[man 2]  Olafur Eliasson is celebrated
for creating immersive spaces and experiences.
[man 3]  He's truly an artist who interacts with his environment.
[narrator]  Eliasson is an expert in the art of smoke and mirrors.
[woman 1]  There is no artist on the planet
operating on a more global scale than Olafur.
[woman 2]  To him, changing the world means changing the way we experience the world.
[Olafur] This is my studio in Berlin, and, um...
the studio is really a place where...
I and the team, we work together making art.
I love my studio being exciting and magical
and capable of doing things that otherwise would be hard to do,
because we just play a lot.
It's not rational, it's not pragmatic.
I mean, it's about making art.
So, it's not like walking out of reality into some kind of dream world, right?
You actually walk into the studio
and you see the real world in a microscope.
The mirror is looking to the center at the moment.
Yeah, but that means the mirror is looking to the center
but is on the side   of the ball. 
-[woman] Yes. -[Olafur] Okay.
I mean, there's so much going on
that you don't really look...
carefully enough.
I think it's maybe more interesting if...
maybe they are connected like this?
Because somehow the baits are taking too much attention.
Okay, great. Let's go on.
Phil? Yeah.
[man] Olafur likes...
different kind of materials,
different way to structure things.
So, that openness lead him to...
a new type of art.
[Olafur] A lot of my work is exploring this notion of...
what we consider truth depends on how you look at it.
We create reality as we go through space.  
When you look at a work of art, 
it is as if it is looking at you.
You are the one who's being listened to.  
My work is completely dependent on the spectator
turning ideas into art.
And that's the same thing with, you know, a Netflix space.
Obviously, we have a situation where somebody's watching, right?
Hello. And then,
I assume there's a kind of a screen.
Maybe it is interesting to explore what these people are actually looking at.
I mean, what's actually going on.
The thing is, this is a constructed situation.
Let me just show you.
See this? This is you... This is you and the camera, right?
Look, it's like I'm surrounded with all these people here.
I mean, what we take for granted...
"Oh, he's talking to the camera," is actually...
I wouldn't say it's manipulated, but, you know,
it's... for sure it's constructed, right?
A little bit like this episode.
[man chuckles]
[woman] Okay, here. Why don't you talk to Mark? Here, hold on a second.
[Olafur] So, when I started, I was really interested in...
what was between the walls.
I mean, that invisible thing, which is, I guess...
I guess it's just air, but how can I just show the nothingness?
So, one of my very first works was an attempt to make a rainbow.
I thought about how is a rainbow made.
But the truth is, there's not much to it.
It's about the angle of the eye, the drop, and the light.
And if there is no eye,
then that angle is not there and then there is no rainbow.
The person next to you  doesn't see your rainbow,
because that eye is somewhere else.
This is a space totally dependent on you being there.
When you leave the exhibition, there's nobody in the room.  
There's also no art.
It's not about a rainbow, really. It's really about...
"Do I trust my own eyes and my own capacity to...
engage in the world?"
So, why do I make what I make, right?
I grew up in Denmark, and I spent a lot of time...
with my father in Iceland.
And using water, or mist, or light just came natural to me.
And I like referencing the nature in my work.
See if I can film people looking at it.
[woman] Sorry, there's no photography allowed in here.
[Olafur] Okay. Uh, I am, uh, the artist. I'm sure it's okay. Thank you.
Nature became a kind of a way for me
to create a language
which people could relate to.
Because everybody knows a rainbow.
It's a natural phenomena and something very easily accessible.
And because the water is kind of falling, you're suddenly conscious
about time is passing somehow.  
That's why I like this waterfall a lot
because it's great to just get a sense of the scale
simply by looking at the speed of the water as it falls. 
That's why I took this waterfall and I made it under the Brooklyn Bridge.
Because looking at that
from Manhattan, for instance, you realize,
"Oh, my God. The Brooklyn Bridge is so big...
and the distance across the East River is very long."
And once you know the size of the waterfall,
you also know the size of your own body.
And this is where it gets interesting, right?
It's not so much about the mountain or the landscape and nature and so on,
it's about us.
[woman] Who has the courage
to do something of this scale?
It's enormous.
You have to be so sure in your idea
that you're willing to take that big risk.
And you don't find that that often in artists.
So, the way I always work
is that, obviously, things start with an idea, right?
So, an idea is like... like here, right?
And then, immediately, you have a problem that the idea doesn't have any words.
And there's that lovely, interesting space before you verbalize your idea.
On top of that, the idea comes from somewhere, right?
So, there's something before the idea.
That's an interesting space too, right? Because where do we get ideas from?
I get ideas when I work hard.
Collaboration is very much at the heart of my work.
[woman] This is the work we talked about,
and these are the colors that we ordered.
[Olafur] I need to give the idea language,
and the answer to what language is
is to maybe analyze a little bit,
"Why on earth did I get that idea? Why am I interested in that?"
So, this is the space where I make drawings
because I don't know how to put words on it.
The next step is in the language, right?
I'm very happy to have an amazing team who take the language
and the drawing,
and then we start making models.
I'll just write here, "model."
Oh, it's great.
And these models, they... they kind of give the idea
and the drawing dimensionality. Suddenly, it becomes about space.
And this is actually a work I'm doing for an exhibition in Los Angeles
at, um...
at a... a gallery,
here now, in two months,
which is about smaller works,
things that you can put in your own house.
It needs to be a bit more...
-Like in a lighter...  -Right. Yeah, brighter.
-You're right. -Yeah.
[Olafur] My role is to make sure that it's a work of art, and...
what drives every decision is
not how, but why.
The team is trying to come up with a "how,"
so my role is like the...
the "why" person.
Should we bend it back a bit?
Yeah. Take it back a bit.
That's too much.
[man] I remember early on,
Olafur, I visited him in the studio, and he'd installed a light
that I perceived as yellow,
and I only understood gradually
that I didn't see any other colors. 
All of a sudden, everything was black and white and gray.
[Olafur] I came across a lamp that takes away all the colors.
And I thought, "Oh, it's a miracle."
So, this is monochromatic light. So, it looks like there is no colors.
I mean, there is in fact no colors here,
because there is no white light to bounce it back onto us.
But have a look at this.
It's the prismatic colors, it's the rainbow.
All the colors are actually there.
One of my very first exhibitions
had a huge yellow room
for people to look at their hands and go like,
"The color's gone."
It turned out that the absence of color
kind of makes you more attentive to everything else.
We kind of see more.
But the museum director said,
"You are not just gonna make an empty, yellow room."
He was, like, on his knees,
"Can't we put just one small red rose on the floor,
so that when you look at it, it's not red anymore?"
And I said, "No,
because then the show is about a red rose."
Though sometimes you get obsessed with "how"
and then you sort of lose sight of why we're doing it.  
I kept using the yellow light.
I did a few works with it, which were very minimal.
And when I was working very close with a great curator at the Tate...
I thought of, um...
the weather.
This is now 2003,
and for me, personally, it was where consciousness about the climate started.
But the Weather Project,
to do it was a long process.
Where I actually ended up building a huge model of the space
that I could walk in.
It was very much about, "How can I make
the air, or the void, or the atmosphere
visible?"
And that's how I got to think of fog.  
Once you look up,
I wanted to block out the skylight.  
And then I decided to have mirrors to make the space appear even bigger.
Then I thought, "Why don't I do just half a sphere, and the other half will be
in the mirror,
which also then somehow
suggests that it is actually twice the height,
because the eye and the brain is actually easily fooled.  
And luckily, it looked like the model.  
The monochromatic yellow light  
gives you this otherworldly sense of, you know, a kind of artificial sky.
That's why I called it the Weather Project.
And it was clear that people were having very different experiences.
Some said, "Oh, my God. This is doom and gloom.
It's about apocalypse."
And some people said, "Oh, it's about, you know, contemplative spirituality
and I need to do some yoga."
And interestingly, these two versions of it
could still be together.
You don't have to be the same in order to share a space.  
And the yellow light, I think, was a key driver
in that whole thing.
[Klaus] The Weather Project marked a certain paradigm change
in how people perceive contemporary art.
It's something that's relevant to the way how you see the world.
And it made him much more known in a much wider audience.
[male director] We got it. Thank you so much.
Cheers. 
Good. 
What do you say, "It's a wrap?" How do you say that?
