 Music I welcome you all to , Today ’ s lecture on “ Dower Under Muslim law ” .
 Dower is one of the important component of marriage under Muslim law .
 To understand the institution of Muslim marriage one must learn the concept of dollar in detail .
 Therefore in this lesson we will the discus following issue relating to dower .
 • Definition and Nature of Dower • Kinds of Dower • Fixation of Dower • And Enforcement of Dower Definition and Nature of Dower : Unfortunately , the Islamic concept of Mehar ha been widely misunderstood .
 Those who are obsessed with the contractual element in the Muslim concept of marriage , regard it a “ Consideration ” .
 Those who are more familiar with ‘ dowry ’ confuse it with the same .
 The fact is that Mehar is neither ‘ consideration ’ nor dowry ; it ha a unique position of it own .
 To understand the Muslim concept of dower thoroughly let u [go through] some of the definition of dower by eminent jurist of Islamic law .
 According to Tyabji : “ Dower or mehar is a sum that becomes payable by the husband to the wife on marriage , either by agreement between the party or by operation of law. ” Sir Abdur Rahim , defines it a , ‘ dower is either a sum of money or other form of property to which the wife becomes entitled by marriage .
 It is an obligation imposed by law on the husband a a mark of respect for the wife ’ .
 According to Baillie , ‘ Dower is not exchange or consideration given by the man to the woman for entering into the contract ; but an effect to the contract imposed by the law on her husband a a mark of respect to it subject , the woman. ’ Justice Mahmood defines dower a follows : “ Dower under the Mohammadan law is a sum of money or other property promised by the husband to be paid or delivered to the wife in consideration of the marriage , even where no dower is expressly fixed or mentioned at the marriage ceremony , the law confers the right of dower upon the wife. ” He further elaborates this point a under : - “ Dower may be regarded a a consideration for connubial intercourse by way of analogy to the contract or sale. ” This observation is subject to serious doubt , a , Sir Abdur Rahim correctly [point out] that ; “ It is not a consideration in the modern sense of the term , but an obligation imposed by the law upon the husband a a mark of respect to the wife. ” We know that if dower were a consideration it would always be prompt and specified ; but the law allows deferred dower which is payable on the dissolution of marriage .
 According to Baillie , ‘ Dower is not exchange or consideration given by the man to the woman for ente[ring in]to the contract ; but an effect to the contract imposed by the law on her husband a a mark of respect to it subject , the woman. ’ Justice Mahmood defines dower a follows : “ Dower under the Mohammadan law is a sum of money or other property promised by the husband to be paid or delivered to the wife in consideration of the marriage , even where no dower is expressly fixed or mentioned at the marriage ceremony , the law confers the right of dower upon the wife. ” He further elaborates this point a under : - “ Dower may be regarded a a consideration for connubial intercourse by way of analogy to the contract or sale. ” This observation is subject to serious doubt , a , Sir Abdur Rahim correctly point out that ; “ It is not a consideration in the modern sense of the term , but an obligation imposed by the law upon the husband a a mark of respect to the wife. ” We know that if dower were a consideration it would always be prompt and specified ; but the law allows deferred dower which is payable on the dissolution of marriage .
 And even when it is not expressly fixed or mentioned at the marriage ceremony , the law confers the right of dower upon the wife .
 The law provides that dower can be fixed before , at the time of or after the marriage .
 Dower is , therefore , different from consideration .
 It is in fact an effect to the contract imposed by law on the husband .
 In Nasra Begum v. Rijwan Ali , the court held that where there ha been an agreement between the party at the time of their marriage with regard to the amount of dower payable by the husband to the wife ; the payment of such dower amount becomes recoverable under agreement .
 We know that the binding character of dower is that it ha been divinely ordained .
 The true nature of dower can be found in the Holy Quran itself .
 Holy Quran us the word Sudaqah for dower .
 Sudaqah is a derivative of Sidiq , which mean truth , regularity and friendship .
 Dower in this Quranic sense is the symbol of truthfulness and regularity of the friendship of husband and the wife .
 Dower is to strengthen cooperation between the spouse and [add to] the dignity of woman .
 Kinds of dower : We know that dower is payable whether the sum ha been fixed at the time of the marriage or not .
 Thus dower may be either specified or unspecified .
 If the dower is specified then , again , it may be asked that when it is payable .
 Thus we have the following kind of dower in Islam .
 1 ) Specified dower 2 ) Unspecified dower .
 Specified dower may again be divided into : i ) Prompt dower .
 ii ) Deferred dower .
 Specified dower : The dower , which the party to the marriage may fix by stipulation , is called specified dower .
 Usually the dower is fixed at the time of marriage and the Qazi performing the ceremony enters the amount in the register ; or else there may be a regular contract called Kabin-nama with numerous condition .
 The sum may be fixed either at the time of marriage or later .
 The amount of dower may be fixed by the father if the son is minor or of unsound mind and a father ’ s contr[act on] behalf of a minor son is binding on the minor .
 In the Hanafi School the rule is that the dower a fixed by the father is binding on the son and the father ha no personal liability to pay it .
 But among the Shias the rule is that if the son ha no mean to pay it , the father is liable .
 In a case of , SayedSabirHussain v. Farzand Hassan , a Shia father had made himself surety for the payment of Mehar of his minor son , thereafter , he died .
 It wa held that the estate left by the deceased wa liable for the payment of his son ’ s dower .
 Accordingly in this case , each heir wa made responsible for a portion of the wife ’ s claim in proportion to the share received by particular heir on distribution of the estate of the deceased .
 Where the amount ha been specified the husband will be compelled to pay whole of it , however excessive it may seem to the court , having regard to the husband ’ s mean .
 Now we know that when dower is specified , the question arises : At what time and in what proportion is the amount payable .
 On this basis dower ha been classified a ( i ) Prompt and ( ii ) Deferred .
 Prompt dower : The technical term for prompt dower is Muajjal .
 It is derived from a root meaning to hasten , to precede .
 The term Muajjal , therefore , mean that which ha been hastened or given a priority in point of time .
 Prompt dower is payable immediately after the marriage , if demanded by the wife .
 The prompt dower may be realised by the wife at any time before or after the consummation of the marriage .
 The consummation of marriage or living with the husband is not necessary condition for claiming it .
 The demand should be specified and not conditional or ambiguous ; the payment of prompt dower may be postponed until there is an actual demand by the wife .
 The wife may refuse to [live with] her husband and admit her to sexual intercourse so long a the prompt dower is not paid .
 If the husband sue her for restitution of conjugal right before sexual intercourse take place , non-payment of prompt dower is a complete defence to the suit and the suit will be dismissed .
 The heir of a woman are entitled to it a forming part of her estate , even though she might not have demanded it from her husband when alive .
 Deferred Dower The deferred dower is payable on the termination of marriage by death or divorce .
 It ha not become prompt by the demand of the wife during the continuation of marriage .
 But if there is any agreement a to the payment of deferred dower earlier than the dissolution of the marriage , such an agreement would be valid and binding .
 The interest of the wife in the deferred dower is a vested one and not a contingent one .
 It is not liable to be displaced by the happening of any event , not even on her own death and a such her heir can claim the money if she dy .
 Whether the dower shall be prompt or deferred is primarily a matter of contract between the party .
 When there is such a contract such portion of dower a is agreed to be prompt shall be prompt and the rest shall be deferred .
 But when it ha not been specified , there is a difference of opinion a to whether the whole of it shall be presumed to be prompt or only a part of it .
 Among Shias whole dower is presumed a prompt .
 Under Hanafi School of thought whole of the dower may be promptly awarded , but where the agreement is silent on the question , the usage of the wife family is the main consideration and in the absence of the proof of custom , the presumption is that one half is prompt and the other half deferred , and the proportion may be changed to suit individual case .
 Unspecified Dower Unspecified dower is that dower not specified at the time of marriage or after divorce .
 We know the obligation to pay dower is a legal responsibility on the part of her husband and is not dependent upon any contract between the party .
 Where the dower is specified , it ha to be paid accordingly .
 But where the dower ha not been settled at the time of marriage or after , what are the principle upon which the amount of dower is to be determined ?
 The customary or proper dower of woman is to be fixed with reference to the social position of her father ’ s family and her own personal qualification .
 The Hedaya [lay down] the importance of the rule that her age , beauty , fortune , understanding and virtue must be taken into consideration .
 The Islamic law , therefore , safeguard the right of a wife and attempt to ensure her an economic status consonant with her own social standing .
 The husband may at any time after marriage increase the dower .
 Likewise the wife ha the power remitting the whole or a portion of the dower in favour of her husband or his heir .
 Remission of dower is valid even if made without consideration , provided the wife is a major and of sound mind .
 In case of Ali v. Mohd , Madras High court and in Mazmun-nisa v. Sirajuddin , the High court of Patna took the view that for the purpose of remission of dower the age of majority should be reckoned with under the Indian Majority Act , i.e .
 the wife should have completed the age of eighteen year .
 But in Qasim v. Kaniz , the Allahabad High court expressed the opinion that the age of majority is to be determined under Muslim law .
 On a strict interpretation of the provision of the Indian Majority Act the view of the Allahabad High Court is correct , but socially the better view is that of Patna and Madras High court .
 However , it is to be kept in mind , the remission of a dower must be made by the wife by her free consent .
 The wife ha also the power of reducing the amount of dower voluntarily .
 The remission of her may also be conditional .
 Thus in lieu of dower she may agree to receive annuity .
 No acceptance of the remission of dower on the part of her husband or his heir is necessary .
 Enforcement of dower : Now we would see the enforceability of dower .
 It may be pointed out at the out set that the claim of the wife or widow for unpaid portion of dower is an unsecured debt due to her from her husband or his estate , respectively .
 It rank with unsecured debt and is actionable claim .
 During her life time the wife can recover the debt herself from the estate of the deceased .
 Prompt dower can be enforced by refusal of conjugal right .
 When the prompt dower is not paid the wife can refuse conjugal right to the husband and non-payment of the prompt dower is a firm defence against the husband ’ s suit for restitution of conjugal right .
 Not only this , if on account of non-payment of dower , the wife is living separately from her husband ; he is bound to maintain her .
 The wife can also file a suit against the husband for the recovery of the dower debt .
 A wife can claim maintenance when living separately for non-payment of prompt Dower .
 Deferred dower can not be claimed on demand .
 The non-payment of deferred dower by it very nature can not confer the right of refusal on the wife to [live with] the husband .
 Dower can be satisfied from the estate of deceased husband .
 As we know that dower is a debt and the widow is entitled along with other creditor of her deceased husband to have it satisfied out of his estate .
 The Supreme Court of India ha made following observation about it in the case of , Kapore Chand v. Kadar Unnissa , “ The wife is like any other creditor of the husband and can not , therefore , claim priority for the dower debt over other creditor ; The widow ’ s claim for dower debt ha priority over the other claim of the other heir .
 The heir of the deceased husband are not personally liable for the dower debt of the widow .
 The liability of an heir is to be measured not by his interest in the estate but by the asset which [come in]to his hands. ” The widow ’ s right of retention : We know that a widow can claim her dower even after death of her husband out of his estate .
 The liability of an heir is to be measured not by his interest in the estate but by the asset which [come into] his hands. ” The widow ’ s right of retention : We know that a widow can claim her dower even after death of her husband out of his estate .
 In this respect a right is given to the widow , which is known a widow ’ s right of retention .
 Literally speaking the right of retention is the act of withholding what one ha in his hand by virtue of some right , a where a creditor pay his own claim out of the debtor ’ s property that [come in]to his hand a representative of the debtor .
 Literally speaking the right of retention is the act of withholding what one ha in his hand by virtue of some right , a where a creditor pay his own claim out of the debtor ’ s property that [come into] his hand a representative of the debtor .
 Similarly the Muslim law give the widow , whose dower remains unpaid a special right to enforce her demand called a “ The Widow ’ s right of retention ” .
 This right subsists until her dower is paid off either by husband ’ s heir or is satisfied from the usufruct of the property that she hold .
 Once she loses possession of her husband ’ s estate , she loses her special right and is in no better position than an unsecured creditor .
 Until it is paid she ha a right to retain possession of the property of which she ha lawfully obtained possession .
 The widow ’ s possession of her deceased husband ’ s estate is considered to be lawfully held in lieu of dower where the Mahr-nama provides for it or where she ha been [put in]to such possession by her husband in lifetime or by his heir after death .
 The widow ’ s possession of her deceased husband ’ s estate is considered to be lawfully held in lieu of dower where the Mahr-nama provides for it or where she ha been [put into] such possession by her husband in lifetime or by his heir after death .
 When the widow is already in possession of such property it is presumed that it wa lawfully obtained .
 So far a the nature of widow ’ s right of retention is concerned the following fact are to be taken into consideration .
 1 ) Widow doe not acquire any title to such property .
 The widow ’ s right to retain the possession of the property in lieu of her dower is not in the nature of regular charge mortgage or lien .
 It is in essence a personal right a against heir and creditor of the husband to enforce her right .
 2 ) The widow is responsible to other heir , a she ha to render account to them .
 She is entitled to some reasonable compensation not only for the labour and responsibility imposed upon her for the proper management of the estate but also for bearing to enforce her right of the dower debt and such compensation is in the form of inte[rest on] the principal amount of the dower .
 3 ) A widow can not alienate such property .
 The right of retention doe not give the right to alienate property by sale , mortgage , gift or otherwise for the satisfaction of her dower debt .
 4 ) Heritability .
 The widow ’ s right of retention is capable of descending to the heir of the widow on her death .
 There wa a diversity of judicial opinion a to whether the right to retain possession of the property by a widow in lieu of dower wa heritable .
 But the conflict wa finally resolved by the Supreme Court by holding that the right to hold possession is heritable This wa held in Kapoorchand v Kadar-un-nisa .
 5 ) Transferability of the right .
 So far a the widow is concerned she ha a right to assign her dower debt , but it is unsettled whether the right to hold and retain possession of her husband ’ s estate till dower is paid , is transferable .
 One view is that the right to hold and retain possession of the property being a personal right can not be transferred .
 This view ha been followed in , Abdul Samad v. Alim-ud-din .
 The other view is that the right to hold and retain the possession of the property a a security for the dower debt is property and therefore , transferable .
 The widow ’ s right of retention when extinguishes : The right is extinguished in following case : 1 ) When the widow voluntarily [give up] the possession , which she once held in lieu of dower .
 2 ) When the widow delivers possession of the property to third person .
 3 ) When the dower debt , in respect of which the right is exercised , is satisfied from the usufruct of the property .
 4 ) When the dower debt in respect of which the right is exercised is satisfied by payment , by the heir of the deceased .
 With these word , I conclude the Lecture .
 Thank you very much .
 Music
